# SARS-CoV-2 Wastewater Bioinformatics Analysis Script

This Bash script performs SARS-CoV-2 bioinformatics analysis on Illumina sequencing data. It includes steps for quality checking, alignment, variant calling, and more. This README provides an overview of how to use the script and its features.

## Table of Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Options](#options)
- [Example](#example)

## Introduction

The script automates the following steps for multiple samples:

1. Unzips input files.
2. Concatenates FASTQ files.
3. Performs quality checking of reads using the `fastp` tool.
4. Indexes the reference SARS-CoV-2 genome.
5. Aligns reads using BWA.
6. Converts SAM to BAM.
7. Sorts BAM files.
8. Generates alignment statistics.
9. Calls variants using `ivar`.

The script is designed to be flexible and allows you to specify the reference genome, annotation file, and output directory as command-line options.

## Prerequisites

Before using the script, ensure you have the following software and data files installed and available:

- [Conda](https://conda.io/)
- [fastp](https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp)
- [BWA](http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/)
- [Samtools](http://www.htslib.org/)
- [ivar](https://andersen-lab.github.io/ivar/html/index.html)
- Illumina sequencing data files (FASTQ format)
- SARS-CoV-2 reference genome (FASTA format)
- GFF3 annotation file

## Usage

To run the script, use the following command:

    ./sars-cov-2-bioinformatics.sh [OPTIONS]

## Options

    -g <reference_genome>: Path to the reference genome file (default: Wuhan-Hu-1_MN908947.3.fasta).
    -a <annotation_file>: Path to the GFF3 annotation file (default: sequence.gff3).
    -o <output_directory>: Path to the output directory (default: /media/ncim/Expansion/SARS-CoV-2_Bioinformatics/).
    -h: Display help message and usage information.


## Disclaimer

This script is designed for our internal data analysis purposes and can be customized and used for further research and analysis. It is provided as a starting point for SARS-CoV-2 bioinformatics analysis and should be adapted to specific requirements and datasets.

**Use responsibly**: It is essential to adhere to ethical and legal guidelines when using this script, especially when handling sensitive or confidential data. Ensure that you have the necessary permissions and follow applicable regulations and ethical standards.

This script is provided "as-is," and while efforts have been made to ensure its accuracy and reliability, no guarantees or warranties are implied. Users are encouraged to review and validate the results generated by this script and make any necessary adjustments or improvements based on their specific needs.

By using this script, you acknowledge that you have read and understood this disclaimer and agree to use the script responsibly and at your own risk.
